hello and welcome to the latest episode
of equation strict where I take some of
the most important equations in maps and
then strip them back layer by layer so
that everybody can understand this week
we're looking at a very special set of
equations which are credited with the
first major unification of physical
forces and that would be Maxwell's
equations of electro magnetism like
losing the name really these equations
link together electricity and magnetism
but not only that they also show that
electromagnetic waves must exist and
travel at the speed of light and that
means that light itself is a wave for
our first layer I'm going to outline
some of the uses and applications of
Maxwell's equations to demonstrate just
how incredible how important they are
so in short any form of modern
communication that we now use is a
consequence of Maxwell's equations so
radio television computers any form of
wireless communication Wi-Fi it all
comes from Maxwell's equations Maxwell's
equations also led to the invention of
radar and this is where you send out
radio waves and bounce them back off an
object and then detect them when they
come back and depending on the different
time as if it's speed and how they come
back you can then figure out what the
object is and where it is and this was
incredibly important in World War two
because the Allies had the technology of
radar and the Germans didn't so when the
German bombers were flying over the UK
we could detect where they were and
therefore you know attack them and the
Germans didn't have this technology so
in some sense you could say Maxwell's
equations are the reason the Allies won
World War two and it doesn't stop there
x-rays which we use to scan the human
body
I mean you've broken a bone that relies
on Maxwell's equations you've also got
microwaves to use to heat up our food
the new
she waved scanners which are currently
used in airport security they also are a
consequence of Maxwell's equations
basically almost every aspect of modern
human life as we know it today relies on
electromagnetic waves in one way or
another and they are a consequence of
Maxwell's equations for a second layer
we're going to look at what the
equations actually mean so physically
what's going on there what's hidden
underneath the mats and we have four
equations and I've listened the muscle
about in pairs because they're very
similar so here we have these first two
equations and the top one just tells you
that electricity cannot leap away so it
has to go somewhere if you have
electricity it can't just leak away like
down on a political it's got to go
somewhere and magnetism also cannot leak
away that's where this equation looks
the same because it's telling you the
same thing
but about magnetism there are other two
equations again they look very similar
and what the first one is saying is that
if you have a spinning electric field
then it will generate a magnetic field
so if you have a coil of wire pass
electricity through it it will give you
a magnet it's called an electromagnet
and the second one says the same thing
the other way around
so if spinning magnetic field will give
you electricity so you have a magnet you
spin it it will generate electricity now
we just took back to our third layer and
we come to the individual terms in the
equations so to start with we have e
which is how an electric field e for
electric and then we have H which is our
magnetic field and then in these two
equations we have this operator this
upside-down triangle with a dot next to
it and that's called the divergence
operator and basically it's just a
mathematical function which involves
derivatives for our second two equations
you'll notice there lots of very similar
terms so again we have efore electric
field and hate for our magnetic field we
also
a the triangle operator again so
upside-down triangle with a cross
instead of a dot this is called the curb
so again it's a well-defined
mathematical function there are
instructions that you follow to tell you
how to take the curl of something so
what the first equation is saying is the
curl of your electric field is related
to the time derivative of your magnetic
field so the time derivative here is
just saying how does your magnetic field
change over time so you have a magnetic
field you let some time pass how does it
change the second equation is very very
similar so again we have the curl of the
magnetic field this time and we're
saying that that is related to the time
derivative T for time of your electric
field so again you have an electric
field you let some time pass how does it
change and then in both equations we
have this constant so it's minus 1 over
C for the top one and it's warm divided
by C for the bottom one and see here is
just a constant it's just a number and
it's the ratio of electrostatic units to
electromagnetic units you don't really
know what that means but what you get is
C is around 300,000 kilometers per
second and a kind of already written L
on the board you may have spotted that
is the speed of light so by taking the
ratio of electrostatic units divided by
electromagnetic units you get the speed
of light now this is big
and there is definitely something
underlying this there are underlying
physics here and that's what I'm going
to come onto we've now stripped down to
our fourth and final layer of Maxwell's
equations and this is the big one
this is where Maxwell's equations show
that light is away since the time of
Newton scientists that sort of known or
sort of thought that light was waved
they just didn't really know exactly
what kind of wave or what was really
going on and then Maxwell wrote down his
equations and everything just fell into
place
just made perfect sense the trick is to
write these equations in terms of just
one variable so you'll see here this one
is in terms of eh and this one's in
terms of H and E so if you can somehow
combine them and have an equation just
for e your electric field and just for H
your magnetic field you're going to get
more understanding and that's what we do
a lot of maths we try to rearrange
equations it has just one variable and
I'm going to show you how to do with
these equations and what follows from
the calculation is the prediction of the
existence of the electromagnetic
spectrum the first step of our
calculation is to take this equation
here and take the curl of it
because if you take the curl of the
whole equation that you're doing the
same to both sides so that fine that's
still equal but then you'll get a curl
of H and we can then substitute from
this one for the curl of H to eliminate
page and have everything in terms of e
so now we have the curl of the curl of e
is equal to minus 1 over C squared times
the second time derivative of our
electric field and then we need one
final trick to get to where we want to
be and we need to simplify this term the
curl of the curl of E and what I'm going
to do is use a vector identity so this
is our vector identity the curl of the
curl and it's equal to the gradient of
the divergence minus the laplacian of e
and you don't need to know exactly what
that means but what is really important
about this really great is we have this
divergence aviv grad dog-eater and we
know from this equation that that's zero
so this term here is actually just zero
and so now we can simplify everything
this hopefully you will recognize
because this is the wave equation and
anything that solves the wave equation
which here in the electric field e does
in this form the solutions are waves so
the fact that your electric field
satisfies the wave equation tells you
elect
is a wave and it also tells you the
speed because the speed in the wave
equation is given by the square roots of
the constant here so your speed is C the
speed of light and your electricity is a
wave so electricity is a wave moving at
the speed of light and electromagnetic
wave and you can do the same calculation
because these equations are so similar
for electricity of magnetism to do the
same thing they get the same equation
with your magnetic field and so both
electricity and magnetism satisfy the
wave equation
so they're both waves and they both move
at the speed of light once you know that
light is a wave you can then measure the
wave lengths of different colored lights
so if you think about the rainbow right
red orange yellow green blue indigo
violet the red light is the longest
wavelength and as you move through the
colors of the rainbow your wavelength
actually gets shorter and shorter so
violent has the shortest wavelength of
visible light and that's the key because
this result tells you that there should
be waves of other wavelengths that are
not visible so we have visible light
that we can see but then there are other
wavelengths of light that will exist and
these equations in this theory tells you
that they should exist and once you know
this you can then go out and start
looking for them and that's exactly what
scientists did the full electromagnetic
spectrum is shown here so we have the
longest waves at the top which are radio
waves microwaves so that's radio waves
for transmissions microwave cooking your
food then you move into infrared then
through visible light then ultraviolet
such rays from the Sun then do x-rays
that we use to look at our bodies and
our bones and finally gamma rays this is
like radiation from decaying atomic
material but of course we can only see
the visible ones
so before Maxwell's equations and this
link to the wave equation the fact that
light is a wave
that these wavelengths of light should
exist before that we had no idea so
that's it's just incredible that he came
up with this and then scientists were
like right well if these things must
exist let's go find them it's gonna find
these other wavelengths so then let's
see what we can do with them to all of
the applications that I mentioned they
all came from these relatively simple
equations Maxwell's equations it's it
literally is amazing so thank you
everybody for watching I hope you
enjoyed it if you do like what I'm doing
please do subscribe you can also find me
on Facebook Twitter Instagram all at Tom
rocks Maps check out all of my material
on my website Tom rocks maths calm and
please do join me next time when I'll be
back with another equation ready to be
stripped